RASPBERRY PI MODEL B+
All the details on the latest addition to the Raspberry Pi range

A brief introduction to the latest Raspberry Pi hardwarerelease

The first Model B Raspberry Pi was originally launched for sale on the 29th February 201 2. In two short years our favourite little computer has racked up some pretty serious sales with over 3 million units sold to date and there are no signs of the rate of sale tailing off anytime soon. The Raspberry Pi is here to stay - that is now a well known fact. Both the Foundation and the community that surrounds the Raspberry Pi have produced some incredible software and hardware and has achieved some pretty amazing things - balloon flights to space, visits to Buckingham Palace and perhaps most importantly (and most relevantly to the Foundation's charitable goals) inspiring a huge number of people to get involved with computing, electronics and STEM.

As you probably already know, in the early hours (UK time) on the 14th July 2014 the Raspberry Pi Foundation announced the latest hardware upgrade - the Raspberry Pi Model B+. This represents the first major hardware change to the Raspberry Pi board since the upgrade of the Model B hardware to 512 MB of RAM in October 2012. There had been some minor changes to various components in the interim period (likely due to pricing and supply issues or similar) as well as the release of both the Camera Module, Pi NoIR and the Compute Module. Additionally, as some of the more eagle eyed of you may have noticed, more recently (around April 2014) the USB hub and LAN chip on the Model B had also been upgraded from a LAN9512 to a LAN9514 chip as well as a general redesign of the PCB. Looking at the documentation that comes in the box with the Raspberry Pi, it looks like the change may have been related to FCC class B device certification. However, the change in LAN/USB chip is likely to have also been a hardware trial of sorts before the more obvious changes were made in the Model B+, which actually make use of the additional functionality present in the upgraded LAN/USB chip.

Where to buy?

As per usual, the Raspberry Pi Model B+ is available to purchase from the two main distributors - RS Components and Farnell element 14 and their subsidiaries. It is also already in stock, along with a selection of accessorries, at a number of independent retailers across the world.

First impressions

Whether the Model B+ board that you purchase has originated from an RS Components or Farnell batch, the first thing you are likely to notice is the fantastic new packaging designs as can be seen on the picture on the bottom of the last page. My personal preference is the Farnell packaging, however they are both a significant improvement on the original packaging (basically a plain white box) and the product already looks far more professional with that simple step.

Opening the box and taking a look at the new board the changes are fairly obvious, and this is even more apparent if you look at the picture to the right comparing the new Model B+ with the old Model B. The most important changes, in my opinion, are the inclusion of a 40 way GPIO header instead of 26 on the Model B, four USB ports instead of two and the change to using a microSD card instead of a full size one. As mentioned above, this change to 4 USB ports is possible due to the change to a new LAN/USB chip (LAN9514). This is the little black chip just behind the USB ports. Further changes include the relocation of the 3.5mm jack, removal of the RCA video output jack (the composite video signal has been relocated to the fourth pole on the 3.5mm jack) and the addition of four squarely positioned mounting holes. The new microSD card holder is now of the push-push type so it is held securely in place (when compared to the friction fit of the old one) and also gives a nice "click" when it is correctly inserted!

You will probably also notice from the comparison picture that the USB ports no longer hang off the edge as far and are now lined up with the Ethernet port. There has also been a general tidy up of the design and the major ports (excluding the GPIO and DSI connectors) now all lie on just 2 sides of the board. Obviously some of the connectors have had to be shifted around slightly to accomodate this. This should allow for some much neater cabling for home cinema and professional installations where neat installation is very important. For people who like neatness and aesthetics, the round edges on the new PCB are probably also a welcome addition! Looking at the top of the board there are now only two LEDs on the top (power and activity), and they have been relocated to the same side as the DSI port. The Ethernet connection and activity lights are still present but are now located inside the Ethernet jack itself which both looks great and saves space.

Looking at the comparison of the Model B+ boards from the different suppliers on the previous page, there are some small differences in component selection (see the USB, HDMI , CSI and DSI ports). I am not sure if this is down to the manufacturers sourcing components of their own or whether this is just a coincidence. In either case, the boards are both made in the Sony factory in Wales and look fantastic.

There are some less noticeable changes "under the hood" with the Model B+ getting an updated power circuit that replaces linear regulators with switched ones in order to reduce power consumption by up to 1 Watt. The audio circuit also now incorporates a dedicated low-noise power supply which should improve the quality somewhat and the USB ports can now be fed with up to 1.2 Amps as well as featuring better overcurrent and hotplug behaviour (plugging and unplugging devices while the Raspberry Pi is running).

Getting started

Hopefully you, like me, are fortunate enough to use an SD card with the Raspberry Pi that is actually a microSD card in a holder. Personally I use the official SD card with the Raspberry Pi logo silk screened on the holder. This means I did not have to purchase a new SD card in order to get started with the Model B+. However due to the new firmware needed, it is not necessarily quite as easy as just swapping the SD card out of the old Model B and into the Model B+. There are a few steps you may need to undertake first. This is especially important if you have not updated your operating system in a while.

Open an LX Terminal window and type the following to make sure the software on your SD card is up to date:

Raspberry Pi HATs

With the update to the Model B+, the Raspberry Pi Foundation also recently announced the specification for what they are calling HATs (Hardware Attached on Top). The idea is to have a more regulated framework for add on boards as well as just having a nice name to use for them (similar to Beaglebone Capes and Arduino Shields). The specification outlines a mechanical shape, as can be seen in the picture below, which makes use of the 40 pin header as well as all four of the mounting holes.

All HATs must also have an EEPROM on board which will contain code that allows the Raspberry Pi to automatically identify the add on board and set up the GPIO pins and Linux drivers necessary to get you up and running quickly - which will be extremely useful in schools and clubs with children and beginners.